AI Meets IT: A Path to Success


AI meets IT: a path to success

ABSTRACT
This white paper explores strategic considerations for organizations that are on the path 
to using artificial intelligence to transform business processes. The paper highlights 
the ways in which AI helps organizations streamline and automate processes, drive 
operational efficiencies, improve decision making, and compete more effectively in the 
era of the digitally driven enterprise.

May 2021

DELL TECHNOLOGIES WHITE PAPER



DELL TECHNOLOGIES WHITE PAPER

The information in this publication is provided “as is.” Dell Inc. makes no representations or warranties of any kind with respect to the 
information in this publication, and specifically disclaims implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. 

Use, copying and distribution of any software described in this publication require an applicable software license. 

Copyright © 2018 and 2021 Dell Inc. or its subsidiaries. All Rights Reserved. Dell, Dell Technologies, EMC and other trademarks 
are trademarks of Dell Inc. or its subsidiaries. Intel, Intel Logo are trademarks of Intel Corporation in the U.S. and/or other countries. 
Other trademarks may be the property of their respective owners. 

Dell Technologies believes the information in this document is accurate as of its publication date. The information is subject to 
change without notice. 

Published in the USA 05/21.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

THE RISE OF AI  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  1

THE MAKING OF AN AI STRATEGY: LET THE JOURNEY BEGIN  .   .  1

WHY AI? WHY NOW?   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 2

IMPORTANCE OF AI TO LIFE — AND BUSINESS —  
AND PROCESSES   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 3

AI BENEFITS  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 3

AI CHALLENGES  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 3

OPPORTUNITIES AND USE CASES   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 4

RECOGNIZE THAT IT’S A JOURNEY   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 4

A COMPREHENSIVE PORTFOLIO  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  5

CUSTOMER RESULTS  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  5

KEY TAKEAWAYS .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  6



1 DELL TECHNOLOGIES WHITE PAPER

THE RISE OF AI
Artificial intelligence, AI, deep learning, machine learning — you hear these terms all the 
time, but what do they really mean for businesses and, more specifically, for IT? 

AI technologies have come into the mainstream, allowing businesses with foresight to 
deploy them to gain valuable real-world benefits right now. Benefits that are driving business 
growth and advantages, such as: 

• Experiencing greater value from IT investments 

• Enhancing relationships with customers 

• Eliminating countless hours of repetitive and mundane management tasks

• Helping to ensure that millions of everyday transactions are completed with both speed 
and accuracy

The truth is, the many of the world’s most innovative companies, from small start-ups to 
large established enterprises, are well on their way with AI and its related technologies, 
gaining immediate and long-term benefits, from infrastructure management to product 
innovation. Are you one of them, and if not, how do you get started?

THE MAKING OF AN AI STRATEGY: LET THE JOURNEY BEGIN
Analysts agree: Organizations with an AI strategy in place realize benefits others can’t. 

The gap between ambition and execution is large at most companies. Three-quarters of 
executives believe AI will enable their companies to move into new revenue-generating 
areas. Almost 85 percent believe AI will allow their companies to achieve or sustain a 
competitive advantage, yet only about one in five companies has incorporated AI capabilities 
in offerings or processes. 

According to an MIT Sloan Management Review report, the most advanced group of AI 
adopters comprises 19 percent of respondents, whom the report refers as “AI Pioneers.” 
These Pioneers overwhelmingly see the need for an AI strategy, with 85 percent agreeing 
they have an urgent need for an AI strategy and 90 percent saying they have a strategy in 
place already. 

Early AI adopters in business have seen their pioneering efforts rewarded. Responses 
show 81 percent have seen revenues rise in three years, based on AI, and are intending 
to forge further forward, having gained both competence and a greater perspective on the 
possibilities. Based on the benefits of early applications, we see great enthusiasm — but 
also a clear-eyed understanding of the challenges of increasing AI investments and how to 
realize value at scale.

The key differences lie in recognizing the transformative value of data, defining a relevant 
AI use case, putting in place AI-enabled and AI-enabling infrastructure, and approaching the 
relationship to AI as an incremental journey, not a destination. 

To learn more, read the MIT Sloan Management 
Review’s report “Artificial Intelligence in 
Business Gets Real .”

https://sloanreview.mit.edu/projects/artificial-intelligence-in-business-gets-real/
https://sloanreview.mit.edu/projects/artificial-intelligence-in-business-gets-real/
https://sloanreview.mit.edu/projects/artificial-intelligence-in-business-gets-real/


2 DELL TECHNOLOGIES WHITE PAPER

Clearly, the time to make AI part of your business strategy is now, but determining a path 
for getting  started is not always as clear. To help your organization see the way forward, 
this paper offers a vision of the AI imperative, as well as a view of what the journey —  
first steps and long-term pace — looks like.

WHY AI? WHY NOW? 
A first step in the AI journey begins with understanding where we are now, why the age of 
AI has begun and why this is the perfect time for organizations large and small to take steps 
toward becoming an AI-powered operation.

Generally speaking, three main technology advances are converging to make AI at scale 
more viable, accessible and imperative today. 

These advances are: 

• The never-ending march of Moore’s Law, delivering compute at scale, distributed across 
data centers, clouds, connected devices and embedded intelligence

• The emergence of the Internet of Things (IoT), cloud-native applications and new data 
storage methods that, when combined, generate, store and protect massive amounts 
of data at scale, with more and more new data from all that compute rapidly adding to 
historical data 

• The maturation of more precise algorithms that can make sense of data and reveal powerful, 
actionable insights that enable next-generation customer experiences, enhanced business 
processes across all industries and continuously optimized infrastructure.

Most of all, there can be no AI without data. Data is the fuel for the modern era. The deeper, 
larger and more complex our data stores and streams become, the more critical the role of 
AI becomes. Using data, AI is helping organizations accelerate outcomes, drive business 
growth and make smarter, more accurate decisions across an endless number of industries 
and use cases. 

USEFUL DEFINITIONS
BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE (BI) involves the process of 
collecting data from many sources and preparing it for  
Business Analytics. 

BUSINESS ANALYTICS (BA) is the process of describing past  
performance to gain insights of the data through analysis, reporting, 
queries, or visualizations.

ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (AI) is the development of  
computer systems able to perform tasks normally requiring  
human intelligence (such as visual perception, speech  
recognition, and translation between languages, etc.).

MACHINE LEARNING (ML) is a sub-field of AI that provides systems 
the ability to learn from data and improve from experience without being 
explicitly programmed.

DEEP LEARNING (DL) is a type of ML built on a deep  
hierarchy of interconnected “neural network” layers, with ability  
to learn key “features” from data provided.



3 DELL TECHNOLOGIES WHITE PAPER

IMPORTANCE OF AI TO LIFE — AND BUSINESS —  
AND PROCESSES 
Let’s get aspirational for a moment: How might AI transform the way people live and work? 
The possibilities are as endless as the infinite volumes and varieties of data being created all 
around us at every moment. 

Much like the printing press, which unlocked the vaults of human knowledge, freeing it from 
the libraries of monasteries and placing it in the hands of the masses, igniting an era of 
unprecedented creativity and innovation that laid the foundation for the modern age, AI too will 
usher in an era of explosive innovation, igniting the next major epoch of human experience. 

This new epoch will be driven by the realization that the value of AI is less about artificial 
intelligence that replaces human experience and more about augmenting human 
intelligence, freeing humans to focus on higher-order challenges and helping us make 
better decisions faster. This human-AI partnership will unleash creativity and innovation 
not possible by humans or machines alone. This is why studies suggest that AI will 
create more jobs than it eliminates, and organizations of all kinds will benefit from these 
new human-machine partnerships. 

AI BENEFITS
The driving force behind AI is its power to accelerate human progress, from the everyday to 
the life-altering. 

AI has broad applicability, spanning both public and private sectors and markets of all kinds, 
from industrial to medical, from education to finance. 

Here is a sampling of the impacts AI is already having:

• Bionic vision: The Computer Vision Group at CSIRO (Commonwealth Scientific and 
Industrial Research Organisation) has developed software for a bionic vision solution 
designed to restore sight for people with profound vision loss. This life-changing advance 
uses large-scale image datasets to learn to recognize more types of images. 

• Safer surgeries: A study that involved 379 orthopedic patients found that AI-assisted 
robotic procedures resulted in five times fewer complications compared to surgeons 
operating alone.

• Better-dressed, less stressed human beings: Stitch Fix uses AI to enhance the 
company’s personal styling services.

• Enhanced credit card fraud protection: Mastercard uses machine learning algorithms 
to examine 160 million transactions per hour by applying 1.9 million rules each transaction 
— all in a matter of milliseconds. 

• Better identity verification: Mastercard goes beyond facial recognition to learn motions 
unique to each user and determine if “you’re really you” by, for example, how you hold 
your phone while using it.

AI CHALLENGES
As with every new technology, AI comes with unique challenges, especially in the realm of 
data and compute. Data is the raw material of AI; it feeds the systems that glean the insights 
and make the predictions, and the more data the more accurate AI can become.

But all data is not good data. Data is often messy — it’s duplicated, incomplete, geo-biased 
and requires data engineering — so simplifying data acquisition, management, access and 
protection are all critical. It’s all about separating the signal from the noise and ensuring you 
have the right skills, tools and use cases in place to do so.

According to IDC’s 
findings, the amount 
of data created and 
replicated experienced 
unusually high growth in 
2020 due to the dramatic 
increase in the number 
of people working, 
learning and entertaining 
themselves from home . 
However, less than 2 
percent of this new data 
was saved and retained 
into 2021 .

Source: IDC, "Data Creation and 
Replication Will Grow at a Faster Rate than 
Installed Storage Capacity, According to the 
IDC Global DataSphere and StorageSphere 
Forecasts.” March 24, 2021.

https://www.csiro.au/en/News/News-releases/2017/CSIRO-powers-bionic-vision-research-with-new-Dell-EMC
https://www.forbes.com/sites/bernardmarr/2018/07/27/how-is-ai-used-in-healthcare-5-powerful-real-world-examples-that-show-the-latest-advances/#6870bfa05dfb
https://www.forbes.com/sites/bernardmarr/2018/05/25/stitch-fix-the-amazing-use-case-of-using-artificial-intelligence-in-fashion-retail/#352fd1743292
https://www.dellemc.com/en-us/solutions/artificial-intelligence/index.htm#overlay=https://www.emc.com/collateral/whitepaper/mastercard-fighting-fraud-the-smart-way.pdf
https://www.dellemc.com/en-us/solutions/artificial-intelligence/index.htm#overlay=https://www.emc.com/collateral/whitepaper/mastercard-fighting-fraud-the-smart-way.pdf
https://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS47560321
https://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS47560321
https://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS47560321
https://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS47560321
https://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS47560321


4 DELL TECHNOLOGIES WHITE PAPER

In addressing your data challenges, keep these points in mind:

• Data is everywhere, but not always where you need it, so it’s becoming more and more 
essential, in the age of IoT, for example, to move compute capabilities to where the data 
resides.

• Data is overwhelming in that it touches every part of modern business and is endlessly 
and exponentially growing. This makes it all the more important to identify specific areas in 
which to begin AI implementations and ensure those implementations allow you the ability to 
seamlessly scale as your AI focus grows.

Further, massive data sets and modern algorithms require powerful compute and cost-efficient 
and performance-optimized storage. These solutions are often accelerated with graphics 
processing units (GPUs), which are efficient at processing large blocks of data in parallel, and 
field programmable gate arrays (FPGAs), a type of semiconductor that can be programmed or 
reprogrammed after manufacturing. 

However, where analytics operations are executed varies based on workload. 

• For real-time decisions, the high cost of transport and the need to minimize latency means that 
being able to move the algorithms and the compute to the data is essential for success.

• For workloads that require direct access to massive amounts of data across a variety of data 
sources, moving data to compute makes sense.

• Sometimes it’s a combination of the two, where data can be analyzed and acted on against 
locally but still benefit from federated insights across multiple similar locations.

In short, all three of the core elements (algorithms, data, compute) need to be fluid and movable. 
We must be able to take any two of these key elements to the other depending on the use case, 
where it matters, and when it matters, to the business.

OPPORTUNITIES AND USE CASES 
So, how do you, in your current situation, start doing more with AI and ML technologies to 
influence the future arc of your organization? 

The first step is identifying a use case, or a series of use cases that will help deliver the 
outcomes you have in mind. Are there “adjacent spaces” you might do well to explore? 
That is, concurrent business models, somewhat removed from your own but with service 
synergies and demographic or logistical overlaps that might lead you to tap into vast new 
revenue streams? What new product and service innovation secrets are buried inside 
customer feedback data? AI and ML may help you answer those questions.

RECOGNIZE THAT IT’S A JOURNEY 
Data is at the heart of the AI journey. Data is fundamental for AI and its subfields, including 
machine learning and deep learning. Given this reality, the AI journey begins with the 
consolidation of data for analytics and then builds from there, creating analytics-based 
applications to drive the intelligence, modeling and inferencing that is driven by data.

While the path to AI is different for all organizations, here are some common steps in the AI 
journey:

• Outline the business goals and align the company’s AI strategy to define the use case(s)

• Determine data availability and prepare the data for AI analysis and action

• Understand and integrate infrastructure requirements

• Determine steps to build models with validation methodologies 

• Establish tracking tools and systems

• Adapt and scale the strategy over time



5 DELL TECHNOLOGIES WHITE PAPER

TIPS FROM IDC
Based on a study of the characteristics of leading IT organizations, IDC offers these 
recommendations for organizations that want to create a stable foundation for unlocking 
data capital:

• Embrace autonomous infrastructure that will eliminate tedious maintenance and 
management tasks and allow IT staff to focus on more strategic initiatives.

• Invest in modernized infrastructure that enables your organization to capitalize on the 
value of your data. 

• Implement software-defined networking capabilities to automate the provisioning of 
workloads across internal, colocation and cloud data centers.

• Standardize on a single management platform or enable integration between multiple 
platforms to improve collaboration and oversight among organizational silos.1 

A COMPREHENSIVE PORTFOLIO
As you determine your best next steps on the journey to adopting AI solutions, modern 
infrastructure is an imperative — and Dell Technologies delivers. By offering the industry’s 
most comprehensive portfolio of AI-capable systems, servers, storage, solutions and 
services, Dell Technologies enables your organization to take control of data to accelerate 
time to faster, better, deeper insights.

With the intelligent technologies in modern infrastructures with AI capabilities, and with 
corresponding AI services, Dell Technologies makes AI adoption faster, easier and more 
collaborative. Dell Technologies gives you a choice of flexible and scalable solutions, small 
and large, opening the AI market to organizations of every size. Purpose-built workstations, 
servers, storage and Dell EMC Ready Solutions for AI provide opportunities to address AI-
focused use cases that advance business goals.

For years, Dell Technologies has been the undisputed leader in data management, data 
protection, data storage and compute — the infrastructure building blocks necessary to 
store, protect and execute against the valuable data that is the fuel for AI. We continue to 
aggressively innovate in these areas. In addition, we are ourselves an early adopter and 
advisor when it comes to AI strategy and best practices.

CUSTOMER RESULTS 
Here are a few examples of the ways in which Dell Technologies customers are capitalizing 
on AI solutions to drive their businesses forward.

1 IDC, “Emerging Technology and Modern IT: The Key to Unlocking Your Data Capital,” an IDC white paper sponsored by 
Dell Technologies and Intel, 2018.

Explore Moor Insights & 
Strategy’s perspective on how 
Dell EMC Ready Solutions for 
AI take the guesswork out of AI 
initiatives — while decreasing 
time to market and time to 
learning . Watch the video .

https://cdn2.hubspot.net/hubfs/2295439/Blog/Blog%20Downloads/IDC_The%20Key%20to%20Unlocking%20Your%20Data%20Capital.pdf
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xL4rvQ3uYwk&feature=youtu.be
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xL4rvQ3uYwk&feature=youtu.be


6 DELL TECHNOLOGIES WHITE PAPER

To learn more, visit DellTechnologies.com/AI.

IMPROVE OPERATIONAL EFFICIENCIES 
The best time to solve a problem is before it happens. That’s a goal of Dell SupportAssist 
that is enabled by AI. This automated proactive and predictive technology helps you reduce 
your steps and time to resolution, often detecting issues well before they become a crisis.

Using real-time data and predictive modeling for accelerating time to resolution, Dell 
SupportAssist actively monitors the health of your IT infrastructure. If an issue is 
detected, Support Assist notifies your organization and Dell Technologies. In some cases, 
SupportAssist can even predict a failure and resolve the issue before a failure occurs.

SupportAssist is available to all customers at no additional charge. It’s included with all support 
plans, but features vary based on service level agreements. Explore Dell SupportAssist.

TRANSFORM DECISION MAKING 
Zenuity, a joint venture of Volvo Cars and Veoneer, is using AI to develop advanced driver-
assist systems and autonomous-driving technologies that promise to take vehicle safety 
systems to a new level. The company is expected to have its first driver-assistance products 
available for sale by 2019, with autonomous-driving technologies following shortly thereafter.2 

Zenuity’s entire end-to-end solution is managed by solutions from Dell Technologies. 
Read the case study.

DISCOVER NEW REVENUE STREAMS TO GROW THE BUSINESS
Dell Technologies solutions for AI don’t just speed set up time for data scientists; they also 
provide faster, deeper AI insights — in some cases, instantaneous insights. 

For example, a Dell Technologies white paper on fraud detection notes that Mastercard 
completes 165 million financial transactions per hour while employing a model that verifies 
each transaction against 1.9 million rules to protect customers from fraud in real time using 
Dell Technologies machine learning with Hadoop. 

Drawing on this expertise in data analytics, Mastercard launched Mastercard Advisors — an 
entirely new business and new revenue stream based on AI and data analytics solutions. 

KEY TAKEAWAYS
Today, AI is fundamentally transforming business by enabling organizations to deliver faster, 
better, deeper and unforeseen insights that streamline and automate processes that drive 
operational efficiencies, deliver the speed and accuracy of insights to transform decision 
making, and drive the results, revenues and customer experiences that deliver strong 
business growth. Organizations that capitalize fully on the AI opportunity will be positioned 
for greater competitiveness and success in the era of the digitally driven enterprise.

If you’re on, or about to begin your journey to AI, Dell Technologies is an ideal partner. 
Dell Technologies provides the expertise, along with a broad, innovative portfolio 
of technologies, to deliver the data-driven solutions that underpin successful AI 
implementations. Organizations, right now, are using the insights from data, and the 
power of Dell Technologies AI products and solutions, to differentiate themselves from 
the competition.

2 Volvo Cars news release, “Volvo Cars and Autoliv announce the launch of Zenuity,” January 03, 2017.

A study by Moor 
Insights & Strategy 
concludes that Dell 
Technologies, with its 
breadth of solutions 
and extensive 
expertise, is “a very 
good partner for 
enterprise AI .” 
Read the white paper .

http://DellTechnologies.com/AI
https://www.dell.com/en-us/work/learn/supportassist
https://www.dell.com/en-us/work/learn/supportassist
https://www.dell.com/en-us/work/learn/supportassist
https://www.emc.com/collateral/solution-overview/zenuity-case-study.pdf
https://www.emc.com/collateral/whitepaper/mastercard-fighting-fraud-the-smart-way.pdf
https://www.media.volvocars.com/global/en-gb/media/pressreleases/202044/volvo-cars-and-autoliv-announce-the-launch-of-zenuity
http://www.moorinsightsstrategy.com/research-paper-dell-technologies-ready-for-artificial-intelligence-leadership/
http://www.moorinsightsstrategy.com/research-paper-dell-technologies-ready-for-artificial-intelligence-leadership/

	The rise of AI
	The making of an AI strategy: let the journey begin
	Why AI? Why now? 
	Importance of AI to life — and business — 
and processes 
	AI benefits
	AI challenges
	Opportunities and use cases 
	Recognize that it’s a journey 
	A comprehensive portfolio
	Customer results 
	Key takeaways