Clinical natural language processing: 
Unearthing deeper oncology insights by mining unstructured medical notes

optum.com

Anne-Marie Guerra Currie, PhD, Director, Data Science

Bertrand Lefebvre, PhD, Principal Data Scientist

Kazuki Shintani, MS, Principal Data Scientist

Tonnam Balankura, PhD, Sr. Data Scientist

Oncology



Clinical natural language processing: Unearthing deeper oncology insights by mining unstructured medical notes

Page 2optum.com

We surface this critical and detailed oncology data by leveraging our proprietary natural language processing 
(NLP) system that performs automated information extraction on the free-text medical records repository 
within the Optum electronic health record (EHR) data asset to provide key oncology-related insights to our 
clients in an easy-to-use format.

Our oncology-focused NLP system is designed to identify the positive occurrences of desired oncology 
concepts, such as cancer type, TNM, stage and biomarkers, as well as enable the exclusion of semantic 
contexts that are not desired oncology contexts. 

For example, if the goal is to identify patients with prostate cancer, the Optum NLP system identifies different 
semantic contexts and appropriately extracts the desired contexts into a structured format. The concepts are 
then able to be easily searched by our clients. Some examples of the contexts that occur within the notes are 
shown in Table 1:

Table 1. Sample of contexts for cancer statements

Sample text Concept

“Patient has stage II prostate cancer” Patient positive for prostate cancer

“Negative for prostate cancer” Patient negative for prostate cancer

“ If prostate cancer is found, patient may require 
additional imaging”

Hypothetical prostate cancer situation

“Might be prostate cancer” Hedged prostate cancer statement

“ Prostate cancer is a common cancer among males” Prostate cancer not relevant to patient

Optum oncology data initiatives include enriching 
our data by extracting essential information from the 
oncology patient’s medical records and making it usable 
for researchers. Specific oncology concepts important in 
understanding the progression of the disease are often 
not available in structured formats, particularly the tumor, 
node and metastasis (TNM) values, stage information and 
biomarkers.

patients who have at least 
one solid tumor ICD code2M

Within the Optum EHR data source, there are 2 million patients who have at least one solid tumor ICD code. 
Manually reviewing hundreds of millions of documents, and manually extracting clinical data for research, 
is not a scalable approach. Our NLP system offers an automated solution for providing insights from a large 
collection of medical notes that continues to grow each day.



Page 3optum.com

Clinical natural language processing: Unearthing deeper oncology insights by mining unstructured medical notes

Sentence: “Left breast cancer stage T1b N1mi M0.”

Entity tagging:

Relation linking:

has direction has stage

Frame

cancer

Cancer

breast

Direction

left

Stage_tnm

T1b N1mi M0

Entity, relation, frame extraction:

Left

stage_tnmdirection cancer

stage_tnmdirection cancer

breast cancer stage T1b N1mi M0

Left breast cancer stage T1b N1mi M0

Information extraction process: Entities, relations and frames

As the NLP system processes the clinical notes data, our trained models extract relevant entities in the 
text and the relationships between them using three approaches: 

Example A shows the entity, relations and frame extraction. Individual entities are tagged, or labeled and 
linked to one another via relations. Relation extraction links one tag to another tag. 

In Example A, “cancer” tag links to “direction” and “stage_tnm” tags. Frame extraction groups relations 
originating from the same parent concept into a structure that is more easily consumable as table-like data. 
The frame is a logical set of semantic units, and the frame for the cancer stage context is shown extracted into 
table format in Example A.

1 Entity extractionThe extraction of a concept or entity represented by lexical units or phrases in the free text.
Relation extraction
The extraction of the relationships between entities.2

3 Frame extractionThe extraction of the logical semantic group of lexical units and the collection of any relevant relations.

Example A. Entity, relation, frame tagging and extraction



Page 4optum.com

Clinical natural language processing: Unearthing deeper oncology insights by mining unstructured medical notes

Modeling approach

The Optum oncology NLP system leverages best practices in data science and automation. Our sophisticated 
system goes beyond term-matching and rules-based approaches by incorporating machine learning and deep 
learning, in order to ensure the correct identification of the desired oncology context. 

The advantage of leveraging supervised machine learning models is the ability to accurately identify the 
appropriate contexts in an automated fashion over highly variable text. Our supervised machine-learning 
models are trained to identify broader patterns that are not explicitly and manually created by a human as 
a rule, but instead, the machine learns from a sample of labeled data that will then enable the system to 
generalize to relevant contexts.  

Our models are evaluated against a held-out annotated test set, which the models has not seen before. The 
results of this test help ensure we are not overfitting to the training data and that the model will remain 
reliably accurate with new data.

Annotation design and gold standard data development

The thoughtful crafting and designing of an annotation scheme and appropriate sampling of notes 
to annotate are critical to ensure high-performing NLP models. The annotation design and sampling 
methodology is systematically developed with NLP data scientists specialized in the field of clinical NLP in close 
consultation with clinical experts (oncologists, oncology clinicians, pharmacists, molecular biologists, medical 
informaticists and other physicians). During the annotation design stage, the team carefully and thoughtfully 
outlines the entities and relations to annotate and extract. This design focuses on both the clinical context as 
well as the generalizability of the concept space to ensure scalability and extensibility of the NLP approach for 
our overall data enrichment.

Our annotation guides are iteratively improved over time, and changes are tracked and reviewed in version 
control to ensure consistency and reliability of our process. An iterative and careful review is conducted on the 
annotation design by a team of diverse clinical and data science subject-matter experts for clinical content, as 
well as for data science design structure. Once the annotation design and the random sampling methodology 
are refined, a random sample of data is drawn and additional refinements may be made to the specifications 
during the annotation process. Each note in the sample is double-annotated by two annotators and any 
conflicts are resolved in a third review by a curator. This process occurs with each document in our sample. 
The sample is then subdivided into the subsets of train, validation and test.

Once models are finalized, these models are run at scale in a distributed manner on our collection of notes. 
Extracted entities are normalized in order to reduce the variability of the output and to facilitate analysis, and 
whenever possible, linked to controlled vocabularies and ontologies.



Annotation 
& Curation

Model 
Development

Sampling
Gold 

Standard

Production 
Models

EHR data
(Clinical 
Notes)

Output

Models promoted to production

Annotation
Guide

Data Exploration 
& Requirements

11000 Optum Circle, Eden Prairie, MN 55344

Optum® is a registered trademark of Optum, Inc. in the U.S. and other jurisdictions. All other brand or 
product names are the property of their respective owners. Because we are continuously improving our 
products and services, Optum reserves the right to change specifications without prior notice. Optum is 
an equal opportunity employer.

© 2020 Optum, Inc. All rights reserved. WF2202949 04/20

optum.com

Figure 1. Model development and production process

Benefits & Results

The advantages of our rigorous approach and combination of techniques is scalability, comprehensive 
extraction, and extraction that is methodically consistent and reliable. Overall, the combination of rules, 
traditional machine learning and deep learning techniques leads to effective and highly accurate results. 
The extraction results for specific oncology concepts for cancer, stage and TNM are consistently above 
90% precision and all 58 biomarkers in our product are above 80% precision. These high-quality results 
allow our clients to be confident that our data is robust enough for their research purposes.

Clinical natural language processing: Unearthing deeper oncology insights by mining unstructured medical notes